Documentation Livewire alpha front-end (#53)
LycheeOrg/LycheeOrg.github.io: docs/livewire.md

## Components and views

> Inside Lychee a request has two possible directions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Laravel framework on which Lychee is based provides to options how a request may be routed:
```

> - it is directed to a controller: `app/Http/Controllers`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the request is directed to a controller below `app/Http/Controllers`
```

> - it is directed to a Livewire component `app/Http/Livewire`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the request is directed to a Livewire component below `app/Http/Livewire`
```

> In the first case, a controller will return a JSON object or a page rendered from a blade template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the first case, a controller returns a JSON object or a HTML page rendered from a blade template.
```

> In the second case (livewire), only a block of html built from a blade template will be returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the second case (livewire), only a block of HTML built from a blade template will be returned.
```

As a consequence, from a very high level Livewire makes use of two folders:

- `app/Http/Livewire` which host the components and their inner logic.
- `resources/views/components` which host the layout of the components.

> So far one could say there are not much difference with a normal request life cycle. Where Livewire starts to shine is in the ability to call the methods of the component directly _from the html_. What it means is, that instead of having to use a javascript hook, and make an AJAX call, parse the result and update the layout accordingly, the user can directly interact with the component and Livewire takes care of the rendering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far one could say there are not much difference with a normal request life cycle. Where Livewire starts to shine is in the ability to call the methods of the component directly _from the HTML_. Instead of having to use a Javascript hook, make an AJAX call, parse the result and update the layout accordingly, the programmer can directly interact with the component and Livewire takes care of the rendering.
```

## A brief introduction to Livewire

> We first give a short intuition of how Livewire, the framework of the new front-end works.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We first give a short intuition of how Livewire, the framework of the new front-end, works.
```

### Livewire and Controllers

> The Laravel framework on which Lychee is based provides to options how a request may be routed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Laravel framework on which Lychee is based provides two options regarding how a request may be routed:
```

- the request is directed to a controller below `app/Http/Controllers`
- the request is directed to a Livewire component below `app/Http/Livewire`

> In the first case, a controller returns a JSON object or a HTML page rendered from a blade template.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the first case, a controller returns a JSON object or an HTML page rendered from a blade template.
```

In the second case (Livewire), only a block of HTML built from a blade template will be returned.

> From a very high level Livewire makes use of two folders:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From a very high level, Livewire makes use of two folders:
```

- `app/Http/Livewire` which hosts the components and their inner logic.
- `resources/views/components` which hosts the HTML layout of the components.

> So far one could say there are not much difference with a normal request life cycle. Where Livewire starts to shine is in the ability to call the methods of the component directly _from the HTML_. Instead of having to use a JavaScript hook, make an AJAX call, parse the result, and update the layout accordingly; the user/programmer can directly interact with the designated component and Livewire takes care of the request and rendering.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So far one could say there is not much difference with a normal request life cycle. Where Livewire starts to shine is in the ability to call the methods of the component directly _from HTML_. Instead of having to use a JavaScript hook, make an AJAX call, parse the result, and update the layout accordingly, the user/programmer can directly interact with the designated component and Livewire takes care of the request and rendering.
```

### Laravel Components

In Laravel, it is possible to create reusable templates also called components. They are called from the blade part using the following syntax:
```html
<x-album :data="$album" />
```
Note that PHP expressions and variables should be passed to the component via attributes that use the `:` character as a prefix (in this case `data`).

> Attributes are automatically be inserted in the constructor of the component:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Attributes are automatically inserted in the constructor of the component:
```

```php
public function __construct(AbstractAlbum $data)
{
	// component logic for the rendering
}
```
Laravel then calls the `render()` method and returns the corresponding view.
```php
public function render()
{
	return view('components.molecules.album');
}

```
Public attributes in the component class (e.g. `public string $title`) are then accessible in the blade template part:
```html
<!--  ...  -->
<div class='overlay'>
	<h1 title='{{ $title }}'>{{ $title }}</h1>
</div>
<!--  ...  -->
```

### Livewire Components

Similarly to Laravel components, the Livewire ones use the `render()` method, blade views, and public attributes.
One could say that the Livewire components are just Laravel components on steroids.

In order to call Livewire, the following syntax is used:
```html
<livewire:sidebar.album :album="$this->album" />
```
This will call the Livewire component located at `app/Http/Livewire/Sidebar/Album.php`.  

> As opposed to their Laravel counterpart, it is not possible to use the Constructor to read the attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As opposed to their Laravel counterparts, it is not possible to use the constructor to read the attributes.
```

For this reason a method `mount()` has been added:
```php
public function mount(AbstractAlbum $album)
{
	$this->load($album);
}
```
Then the `render()` function is used in order to retrieve the respective HTML section of the component.
```php
public function render()
{
	return view('livewire.sidebar.album');
}
```

#### Calling methods

Where Livewire becomes interesting is in its ability to call PHP functions directly from user-land.
Methods of the component can be callable by using additional HTML attributes.
For example in `resources/views/livewire/components/modules/album.php` the attribute `wire:click="login"`
will call the `login()` method of the component `app/Http/Livewire/Header.php`
```html
<a wire:click="login" class="button">
	<x-icons.iconic icon='account-login' />
</a>
```
```php
public function login()
{
	// ...
}
```
This method will then execute and trigger a re-rendering of the component.

#### Emitting events

> In addition to calling method of a component,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to calling a method of a component,
```

it is also possible to trigger actions in other components.

> As matter of fact, in the specific case of the `login()` method,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a matter of fact, in the specific case of the `login()` method,
```

> we are emitting an event which will have as effect to open the `app/Http/Livewire/Components/Modal.php` component with a login form:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we are emitting an event which will trigger the opening of the `app/Http/Livewire/Components/Modal.php` component with a login form:
```

```php
protected function login()
{
	$form = 'forms.login';
	$params = [];
	$this->emitTo('components.modal', 'openModal', $form, $params);
}
```
`Modal.php` contains the following code:
```php
class Modal extends Openable
{
	protected $listeners = [
		'openModal',
		// ...
	];

	public function openModal(string $type, array $params = [])
	{
		//...
	}
```
The protected variable `$listeners` informs the component which events it needs to react to.
In this specific case `openModal()` method has two arguments which are provided by the `$this->emitTo('componentName', 'eventName', $arg1, $arg2);`

> With those tools at hand, we are now able to understand a bit more how the structure of the Livewire front-end works.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With these tools at hand, we are now able to understand a bit better the structure of the Livewire front-end.
```

## Lychee Livewire Front-end

A high-level view is presented in the following picture (at the time of writing).

[![](img/Livewire Class Diagram.jpg)](img/Livewire Class Diagram.jpg)

For now the entry point is always `app/Http/Livewire/Pages/Fullpage.php`.
The path of the code is the following:

1. Calls `app/Http/Livewire/Pages/Fullpage.php`
2. Loads:
	- the `Top` level,
	- or the requested `Album` and children,
	- or the requested `Album` and requested `Photo`
3. Renders `resources/views/livewire/pages/fullpage.blade.php`
4. Calls:
	-  `app/Http/Livewire/Component/Header.php`
	- and one of the `$module`
		- `app/Http/Livewire/Modules/Albums.php`  
		- or `app/Http/Livewire/Modules/Album.php`  
		and `app/Http/Livewire/Components/Sidebar.php`
		- or `app/Http/Livewire/Modules/Photo.php`  
		and `app/Http/Livewire/Components/Sidebar.php`
5. Renders `resources/views/livewire/components/header.blade.php`
	and calls the header layout corresponding to the current module selected:
	- `resources/views/livewire/components/modules/albums.php`
	- or `resources/views/livewire/components/modules/album.php`
	- or `resources/views/livewire/components/modules/photo.php`

> 6. Renders the module selected, in the case of 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Renders the module selected; in the case of 
```

	`app/Http/Livewire/Modules/Photo.php` we also call the
	`app/Http/Livewire/Components/PhotoOverlay.php`
7. Renders the sidebar `app/Http/Livewire/Components/Sidebar.php`
	which calls:
	- `app/Http/Livewire/Sidebar/Album.php`
	- or `app/Http/Livewire/Sidebar/Photo.php`

> 8. At the point, you pretty much got the intuition...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. At this point, you pretty much have the full picture...
```

In summary:

1. Load FullPage
2. Load Header
3. Load Module
4. Load Sidebar

Each step is basically bouncing between the PHP and the blade part.

## Pitfalls & Wireable

There are a few points where special attention is required. At the end of lifecycle of a request,

> Livewire deserialize the components and forward them to the client in an encrypted and hashed form.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Livewire deserializes the components and forwards them to the client in an encrypted and hashed form.
```

When executing a method call from user-land, component's data are sent to the server and deserialized.

> If an attribute of the Component is an `Interface`, Livewire will panic. It uses the type of the attribute

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If an attribute of the component is an `Interface`, Livewire will panic. It uses the type of the attribute
```

to retrieve the constructor and hydrate the model.

Do note that by default, the dehydration uses the `toArray()` method. As a result the hydration will not be working in most cases.
For this reason Livewire proposes the interface `Wireable` which requires two methods: `toLivewire()` and `static fromLivewire($value)`.

> The first will return the serialized version of the object and the later will rebuild the object from the serialized version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The former will return the serialized version of the object and the latter will rebuild the object from the serialized version.
```
